---
layout: post
title: "Introduction to the Inevitability of Discomfort in Decision-Making"
date: 2019-09-30 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Introducing the idea that the most beneficial choices are often the most uncomfortable ones in the moment."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/introduction-to-the-inevitability-of-discomfort-in-decision-making/
---
<p>     A situation all have faced at one point or another, is one in which the most beneficial solution/choice to make is the one that unwillingly results in  some sort of unpleasantness, whether it be physical, mental, emotional, etc. The catch here is that although it does result in unpleasantness, the unpleasantness is usually temporary, whereas the potential benefits are usually much longer lasting. Now this isn't to say that it really is this simple and should be easy for everyone, because it sure as hell is not. The other catch is that although the unpleasantness of the decision is temporary and smaller when compared to the potential benefits, it usually presents itself as overwhelmingly daunting -- usually to the point at which the daunting nature of it overshadows any potential benefit that was being considered. But, why is this? Shouldn't it be easier for us to make the "right" decision? Why is it so hard? Why does this unpleasantness present itself as such a daunting enemy?</p>

<p>     One possibility, is that our capacity for emotional, mental, or physical unpleasantness is much smaller than our capacity to reasonably analyze benefits and detriments. This I'm not a big a fan of. Another, is that the manner by which we perceive these two things (benefit and unpleasantness), varies drastically. It's not so much how daunting the side effects of the decision are, but simply the fact that they are daunting. I don't believe that people have difficulty making the "right" decisions because they are right, that's absurd. We can definitely acknowledge that they are the right decisions, and that they yield benefits. I believe that they have trouble making decisions that are unpleasant to make (myself included). Because quite honestly, who <em>likes </em>making decisions that are clearly unpleasant to themselves or others? There's no reason to. Does this mean that we shouldn't make them? Just because there are greater benefits, does that fact serve as sufficient cause for rationalizing said decisions?</p>

<p>     As usual, I'm starting to end up with more questions than answers after each paragraph (oh well). But I guess my main concern now, is whether or not we can simply characterize these sets of decisions as "right," simply because they yield more benefits than detriments. Does what the benefits and detriments <em>are</em> matter? Let's try out a few examples and see. </p>

<p class="has-text-align-center">Case 1: A person <em>S</em> is trying to decide which car to buy. Car <em>B</em> is a cost-efficient SUV, with all the necessities, but not necessarily the ideal appearance, though not "ugly." Car <em>B</em>, is slightly more expensive, but has all the necessities, a few extra convenience features, and the exact appearance that <em>S</em> was looking for. I feel that some would say that as long as <em>S </em>is willing to accept the extra cost, and can manage it, then they are justified in choosing car <em>B</em>. Others would say that they set a budget for a reason, and that it is better to act as if anything over budget (car <em>B</em> included) doesn't exist, and to go with car A. I'm not deeming either of these choices right or wrong, but simply presenting a basic, yet common situation. </p>

<p class="has-text-align-center">Case 2: A person <em>S</em> is a full-time professor at a state university. Due to recent serious health implications, they have been caring for their older sibling for the past 6 months, as well as their two children. It has been months since <em>S </em>has gotten a full-night's rest, and it is starting to seriously affect their ability to function normally on a daily basis at work. <em>S</em> is making sure to get all responsibilities regarding their children and older sibling taken care of though. As <em>S</em> begins to suffer from fatigue and sleep deprivation, and is being reprimanded at work for lackluster performance, they begin to wonder if transferring their older sibling to a more equipped institution is the right choice. If they were to do this, their older sibling would be subject to generic treatment, lack of individuality, and would lose all familiar interaction on a daily basis. Though, <em>S</em>'s physical and mental well-being would recover greatly, and their work performance and focus toward their kids would return to normal, and improve. Is this "right?" On one hand, <em>S</em> is saving themselves from an impending catastrophe, wherein they could end up unable to properly care for themselves, or those for whom they are responsible. On the other hand, it almost seems as if they're regarding their older sibling as an object or nuisance, simply sending them away to a not-so-pleasant place to get their life back. Once again, some would see <em>S</em> as entitled to, and responsible for the care of their older sibling, whereas others would say that they've done what they could, but it is starting to become detrimental to all parties. This serves as a more complicated, yet equally realistic example. </p>

<p>     I have presented two examples that face the dilemma initially represented. One seems much more clear-cut than the other though. Yet, they both present the same issues. A decision, one that seems rationally correct, and one that seems correct in all other aspects. Now there are many more factors at play here than simply making the most rational decision. Because although I haven't explored enough to state this, it is a possibility that the rational decision isn't always the best one. Currently, I lean more toward it being the right one. But I'm not here to assert views, but more so explore varying perspectives. Because quite honestly, it gets pretty difficult when applying these idealistic doctrines to reality. I for one, might go for car <em>B </em>in case 1, but opt to transfer my older sibling in case <em>2</em>. One of these is a decision that results in happiness that is actually lasting for the duration of owning the car, yet takes its toll slightly on the wallet, whereas the other is one that has serious implications on potential guilt and family obligations, but results in a better situation for the well being of the self. This could be due to a few possibilities. One could be that I value the toll on my personal funds much less than my own well-being. Another could be that I'm much weaker when it comes to holding my own against temporary happiness than long-time discomfort. Or, it could be both. But at the end of the day, all that can be concluded so far, is that these decisions aren't easy for anyone. And the fact that they're part of our everyday lives doesn't make things any better. I may attempt to propose a methodology for analyzing, and solving these tricky situations, but I'll leave that for another time. </p>
