---
layout: post
title: "Making Use Of Our Studies"
date: 2019-03-07 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Turning months of independent Stoic reading into something more deliberately applied to daily life."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/making-use-of-our-studies/
---
<p>           As of late I've decided to direct specific focus toward the result of my personal studying of the Stoics. The Stoic philosophy is one which I've not only taken a keen interest in, but which I also have made a deliberate effort to incorporate into my own life. In making such a decision, and taking such an interest, it's only natural that I do my research, and conduct studies. And in doing so, I came across a very interesting lesson by Seneca, that I have kept in mind throughout all further studies. It is one thing to study, learn, progress, and research. In all of these actions lie great value and reward. But Seneca stresses that at some point, one must make use of the tools and knowledge which they've acquired, harnessed, and sharpened. If one is to endlessly engage in studies of the past, they are participating in an exercise in futile efforts. Without ever putting such studies to use, and creating your own unique knowledge and thoughts, one is set to waste the time they've so graciously had at their disposal.</p>

<p>     This keeps me reminded that although those such as Seneca, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, Diogenes, and so many others have so much valuable knowledge to offer, I must not simply seek to learn, and never create. Because to truly progress, and to make use of what I've studied and learned,  I must create. And to do so, I must experience, reflect, ponder, and put out that which is of my own mind. And in doing so, I will make my own path leading off of those before me. In doing so, I will be making a conscious choice to provide others with what I aim to be knowledge of value. I am not simply learning to learn, although I do enjoy the process that is studying. Because without a goal with which to test that which I've studied, or a purpose driving me forward, then there is no point in me learning to begin with. To give knowledge that is unique, useful, and valuable is to make use of philosophy and all that it can accomplish, and to do so is my goal. </p>

<blockquote style="text-align:center;" class="wp-block-quote"><p><br>"...in the case of a grown man who has made incontestable progress it is disgraceful to go hunting after gems of wisdom, and prop himself up with a minute number of the best-known sayings, and be dependent on his memory as well; it is time he was standing on his own feet. He should be delivering himself of such sayings, not memorizing them. It is disgraceful that a man who is old or in sight of old age should have a wisdom deriving solely from his notebook. 'Zeno said this.' And what have you said? 'Cleanthes said that.' What have you said? How much longer are you going to serve under others' orders? Assume authority yourself and utter something hat may be handed down to posterity. Produce something from your own resources."<br>"They exercise their memories on things that are not their own. It is one thing, however, to remember, another to know. To remember is to safeguard something entrusted to your memory, whereas to know, by contrast, is actually to make each item your own, and not to be dependent on some original and be constantly looking to see what the master said." <br>"But no new findings will ever be made if we rest content with the findings of the past. Besides, a man who follows someone else not only does not find anything, he is not even looking. 'But surely you are going to walk in your predecessors' footsteps?' Yes indeed, I shall use the old road, but if I find a shorter and easier one I shall open it up. The men who pioneered the old routes are leaders, not our masters. Truth lies open to everyone. There has yet to be a monopoly of truth. And there is plenty of it left for future generations too." </p><p>"...in the case of a grown man who has made incontestable progress it is disgraceful to go hunting after gems of wisdom, and prop himself up with a minute number of the best-known sayings, and be dependent on his memory as well; it is time he was standing on his own feet. He should be delivering himself of such sayings, not memorizing them. It is disgraceful that a man who is old or in sight of old age should have a wisdom deriving solely from his notebook. 'Zeno said this.' And what have you said? 'Cleanthes said that.' What have you said? How much longer are you going to serve under others' orders? Assume authority yourself and utter something hat may be handed down to posterity. Produce something from your own resources."</p><p>"They exercise their memories on things that are not their own. It is one thing, however, to remember, another to know. To remember is to safeguard something entrusted to your memory, whereas to know, by contrast, is actually to make each item your own, and not to be dependent on some original and be constantly looking to see what the master said." </p><p>"But no new findings will ever be made if we rest content with the findings of the past. Besides, a man who follows someone else not only does not find anything, he is not even looking. 'But surely you are going to walk in your predecessors' footsteps?' Yes indeed, I shall use the old road, but if I find a shorter and easier one I shall open it up. The men who pioneered the old routes are leaders, not our masters. Truth lies open to everyone. There has yet to be a monopoly of truth. And there is plenty of it left for future generations too."</p><cite>Seneca's <em>Letters From A Stoic, Letter XXXIII</em></cite></blockquote>
