---
layout: post
title: "An Exercise In Spontaneity: Two"
date: 2019-03-13 12:00:00 -0400
description: "A second round of the random-passage writing exercise, this time with Epictetus's Discourses."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/an-exercise-in-spontaneity-two/
---
<p>  At the moment I’m writing this, I’ve been running this blog for about three months. And instead of trying to endlessly think through ideas arriving at hundreds of questions, I’m choosing to take a little break and make myself explore a singular topic or actually answer a question about a subject unbeknownst to me. To do this, I’ve decided that I’m going to grab my copy of Epictetus' <em>Discourses and Selected Writings</em>, close my eyes, and open to up a random page. Then, I’m going to pick a random passage, and I’ll go from there. </p>

<blockquote style="text-align:center;" class="wp-block-quote"><p>"A friend of mine, for instance, arbitrarily decided that he was going to starve himself to death. When I heard that he was already three days into his fast, I went and asked him to explain. </p><p>'I made my decision,' he said.</p><p> 'Yes, but what drove you to it? Look, if it is the right decision, we ware ready to sit by your side and help you make the passage. But if it was a reckless decision, it should be open to change.' </p><p>'But we must stick with a decision.'</p><p> 'For heaven's sake, man, that rule only applies to sound decisions. I suppose next you will decide that it is night now, and refuse to change your mind because you don't want to. You will repeat, "We must stick with a decision." Begin with a firm foundation; evaluate your decision to see if it is valid -- then there will be a basis for this rigid resolve of yours. If your foundation is rotten or crumbling, not a thing should be built on it, and the bigger and grander you make it, the sooner it will collapse.'"</p><cite>Epictetus, <em>Discourses and Selected Writings, </em>"Book II, Chapter XV"</cite></blockquote>

<p>     One feature of these writings that I enjoy, is the sternness of Epictetus. He is direct, and he expresses what he believes quite firmly. In this post particularly, he expresses the idea that it is pointless to uphold a virtuous attitude if the foundation for such an attitude isn't logically sound to begin with. It is pointless for one to act according to a morally good set of guidelines, if their actions have no basis in virtue, logic, or rational thought. And this makes sense. Who am I to stubbornly uphold my value of honesty and following my own guidelines, when I'm doing so with basis in an absurd choice to begin with. In the case of the excerpt, he emphasizes how stupid the decision to starve to death is, and how although the intent to stand by a decision is virtuous and does not infringe on the integrity of one self, it is stupid nonetheless given the fact that the decision which is being upheld is one that is nowhere near being logically sound. </p>

<p>       Now this lesson takes on a much broader application than in the scope of the excerpt. Not necessarily just as a Stoic, but as a human being in general, the same rules apply. To make a rash, or unfounded decision, is ultimately a mistake. To decide that I will not drink water for a week simply because I want to challenge myself and my body would be a preposterous decision. Not only would I be denying my body of a vital resource, but the motive behind the decision, being one driven by ego, would be the complete opposite of being logically sound. And to no positive end would this decision lead. To pursue virtue, one thing one must do is abide by their decisions, unless there is cause for change, once a logically sound decision has been made, or a sound moral guideline established. This lends to the integrity, honesty, and ability of a person to be relied upon, as well as the progression of oneself. And rational thinking is the foundation from which these sets of guidelines are to be established. If I am to decide that I do not like lying, and due to the fact that it omits truth, misleads others, and strays from what is known to be fact, it is to be considered "bad," and then also decide as a result that I choose not to lie, regardless of the situation, that is a logically, philosophically, and virtuously sound decision. And there is no reason as a progressing Stoic not to uphold such a rule, as no value lies in defying it. This, Epictetus stresses, should be the basis for decision making, and the avoidance of detrimental results. Logically, rationally, and virtuously sound bases for decision making and the establishment of moral guidelines. And so long as one is to follow these rules, and apply them, one is in the right. </p>
