---
layout: post
title: "The Body May Be At Rest, But Is The Mind?"
date: 2019-03-20 12:00:00 -0400
description: "On insomnia, restlessness, and Seneca's observation that a still body doesn't guarantee a still mind."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/the-body-may-be-at-rest-but-is-the-mind/
---
<blockquote style="text-align:center;" class="wp-block-quote"><p>     "His mind is in a ferment. It is this which needs to be set at peace. Here is the mutiny that needs to be suppressed. The fact that the body is lying down is no reason for supposing that the mind is at peace. Rest is sometimes far from restful."</p><cite>Seneca's <em>Letters from a Stoic</em>, "Letter LVI"</cite></blockquote>

<p>     At night, I sleep -- intermittently. At night, I attempt to rest -- usually to no avail. My body may be in a state of rest, but my mind at an uncomfortably high level of uneasiness. Seneca expands on this idea of the body being physically at rest, but the mind remaining mentally uneasy. This is quite the problematic situation to have at hand, especially when one is simply attempting to cultivate the rest that they require ever so desperately. But how is this to be remedied? How do we even begin to analyze such an issue?</p>

<p>     It would probably help to start by analyzing the events of a night, taking into account any of the countless restless nights. Typically, they tend to follow a pattern. I return from some sort of activity or responsibility, and arrive home with the intention of getting some <em>rest</em>. I'll make sure I've eaten, taken care of immediate, pressing responsibilities, ensure that all is clean and organized (as I cannot rest easily if my room is in disarray for example), and then get to my nightly hygienic routine. During all of this, I try to avoid any contact with electronic devices, and any distracting interactions. I even go so far as to do all of this with the minimum amount of lighting possible, to try and avoid going from a brightly-lit room to laying down in complete darkness within a second. I would then turn off whatever lighting is present, and lay down. At this moment, not only do I seem to usually let out a heavy sigh of relaxation/relief, but my body seems to feel as if it is doing so as well. At this point, my body is finally at rest after a day's work. And then as expected, the eyes shut. </p>

<p>     Here is where it gets more difficult than expected. Ideally, upon shutting my eyes, I would experience a short bit of time consisting of a calm body and mind, and a drift into sleep. Realistically, the opposite occurs. On the outside, I've entered a state of literal darkness, and have retired into my mind upon laying down and shutting my eyes. But upon shutting my eyes, it's almost as if all the switches in my brain get simultaneously turned on -- the exact opposite of what I'd like to be the case. Thoughts surge from each and every possible source, and my mind enters a state of complete overdrive. It's a mental experience comparable to having five espresso shots all hitting you at once as you're drifting off in the middle of class or even during a physical activity. The day's events replay in my head, I think about each and every one of them regardless of their importance, contemplate whether my actions during the day were right, if I am content with what I did or did not do, and usually end up beating myself up over situations in which I felt I could have done more, or acted differently. This, plus more, is all occurring as I'm supposed to be trying to fall asleep. Fantastic, right? </p>

<p>     Eventually, I acknowledged that this was occurring, instead of ignorantly experiencing it every night and just accepting it as the norm. And to attempt to remedy it, I didn't try to rid myself of the experience, but initially attempt to control it to an extent. So instead of letting my mind roam free the moment I closed my eyes, I began attempting to organize these thoughts upon closing my eyes. An organized practice of recalling the days events and actions, and thinking them over in an attempt to learn from them. This helped, but in the end only added an aspect of order to a previously disorderly obstacle. And this is where I'm at now. But where do I go from here? How do I simply stop myself, or more so stop my mind from rampantly acting at the most inopportune time? I want my mind to approach the idea of rest and sleep with alacrity, and not to avoid it at all costs. One thought I've come up with, is taking this nightly review, and breaking it up into pieces during the day. So as opposed to harshly critiquing myself on all my actions in the middle of the night, why not attempt to more fairly analyze my actions and daily events as they occur? For example, if I decided to watch a movie in the middle of the afternoon, instead of analyzing this decision as #23 in my not-so-beneficial nightly self-degradation process, I'd think it over after doing it. Was it a good decision? Did I ignore other responsibilities that required tending to? Was it pointless, or beneficial? But ultimately, aiming to eliminate one less distracting thought at the end of the night, early on in the day. Because if I manage to do so with most of the day's decisions and actions, then what is left for me to think about and consider come time to sleep? Unless I end up thinking about whether or not I initially reviewed this things correctly, which would be a whole other absurd issue, then the answer is hoped to be nothing. And at that point, would I not be in the ideal state for rest? A body at rest, and a mind remedied and pleased, at rest and ready for sleep? Well, there's only one way to find out, and there may or may not be a follow-up on this post to disclose progress. </p>
