---
layout: post
title: "On The Value Of A Mistake"
date: 2019-03-07 12:00:00 -0400
description: "A frustrating afternoon becomes an argument for treating mistakes as material for growth rather than shame."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/on-the-value-of-a-mistake/
---
<p>     Today, I spent two hours discontent and angry with myself; this being one of the first emotional responses to a situation I've had in quite a while. And the source of this response, was a mistake in thought. I aim to convey a sense of openness and honesty within these posts, as they serve as more of a platform for me to have discourse with myself and progress through thought. I went to Target today, and as I was leaving, I went to return my basket. Upon placing my basket back on the stack, which was about one and a half my height at this point, I turned and walked away. About two steps into this, I hear a crash, unmistakably being that of the entire stack crashing down. Here is where the issue lied. Upon hearing this, I slightly turned my head to confirm. And my initial response was to acknowledge this, turn, tell myself "they're paid to fix these sorts of things," and leave. And it was not until a second after experiencing this response that I mentally kicked myself in the butt, and turned around to clean my mess. I then left.</p>

<p>     By the time I reached my car and sat down, I was furious with myself. Here I am, writing posts on a blog centered around my experience as a developing Stoic, having an initial response so contrary to the moral guidelines which I've been spending so much time refining and practicing. I looked at what had just happened as the most detrimental leap backward I'd experienced in quite a while. And I was angry at myself for doing so. It didn't matter to me that I corrected my mistake of thought, simply that I had the mistake in the first place. And for two hours, I experienced this anger toward myself. </p>

<p>     I then decided to look back at the situation. To many, this is viewed as the tiniest of mistakes. But to me, it was initially viewed as a monumental failure. But looking back at it, a multitude of questions and thoughts arose.</p>

<ul><li>Is this anger a logical, and/or justified response?</li><li>Is it acceptable for me to direct this anger at myself, when I advocate never directing anger at others for their mistakes or wrongdoings? </li><li>Have I actually made any progress in pursuing a Stoic lifestyle?</li><li>Did I revert to this initial response because I'm participating in a futile effort to change my true nature?</li><li>Why can I be so extrospectively  accepting, yet so stern and demanding introspectively? </li><li>Is the fact that such a tiny event had such a monumental impact on me a sign that I'm actually making progress?</li><li>Is it ever acceptable to exercise such hypocrisy in directing this anger towards myself?</li><li>Is the fact that this is the first emotional response I've had to anything in a while a sign that I'm actually not making that much progress?</li><li>Do mistakes serve as valuable grounds for identifying and exposing underlying faults and shortcomings?</li></ul>

<p>     These are some of many thoughts and questions that arose in the following hours. And I could easily devote great lengths of time to exploring each and every one of these further. But in this case, I chose to examine the value that lies in a mistake, using today's event as a basis. The fact that this one casual, tiny situation yielded so much in the way of progressive thought and introspection provided insight into the potential value residing in any mistake, assuming one is so willing as to search it out. For example, I in experiencing this, was reminded of just how tempting an option ignorance can be. No matter how much one trains their sense of morality, that option to ignore will always be waiting, its ease of acquisition ever so tempting. It also led me to consider that if this is the first emotional response I've had to any situation in a while, should I be making more deliberate efforts to experience these sorts of situations, and take them all as opportunities to grow and learn? I've come to the conclusion that there's no doubt to be had regarding the beneficial aspects of these situations. And what better way to facilitate progress than to find ways to expose the areas in which the most progress is yet to be had? This tiny experience, that yielded such embarrassment, anger, and doubt, illustrated just how invaluable any mistakes are, but also experiences in general. And in combining both experience and intro/retrospection, just how much potential for progress lies. And that the only way to overcome these bad habits, is to face and combat them. The key word that stood out to me in my reviewing of this situation, was when I considered my position as a developing Stoic in having this experience, was "developing." If I never experienced doubt or struggle, or even confusion, then when am I to make progress? I should be chasing risk, the unknown, and that which proves to be difficult, and in doing so, progress the most. </p>
