---
layout: post
title: "Unnecessarily Altruistic?"
date: 2019-03-14 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Questioning whether a focus on self-development has come at the cost of considering others."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/unnecessarily-altruistic/
---
<p>          In my past few posts, I've expressed a large focus on prioritizing the development of the self, the acquisition of knowledge, an experience. But what this focus has also led me to realize, is that I have not been considering virtuous action with reference to any others. I posed the question for example, of whether or not social interaction or a self-development practice were more beneficial, and if when deciding between the two, is there a consistently "correct" choice? In a sense, this can lead to a question with an altruistic foundation as well. Today for example, I was led to consider this. </p>

<p>     After I got a few errands done this morning, I had some free time. A few times in the past few weeks, I've called my grandparents and had a few conversations of decent length over the phone with them. Not only did they express that they missed me, but I also acknowledged that they felt this way.   This morning, I had an opportunity to choose to go pay them a visit. And I did. I went, spent some quality time with them, and enjoyed myself, as I hope they did as well. I didn't spend too great a length of time visiting, as I had other matters to attend to, but I made sure that I devoted enough to hopefully do more than just simply satisfy their longing to see me. What this led me to question though, were a few things. Was this an altruistic act? Was this a good use of my time? Was this a virtuous decision? </p>

<p>     Was this a good use of my time? I believe so. In that span of time, I deliberately engaged in enjoyable activity yielding benefits to both myself, and others. Could I have been doing other things? Of course. But that's always the case, as there seems to be never-ending possibilities for good choices in activity. </p>

<p>     Was this an altruistic act? It just might have been. The motivation behind the decision stemmed from a desire to improve the well-being of two family members in a manner which I knew would yield the desired effect. </p>

<p>     Was this a virtuous decision? Now that's a tough one. As I previously mentioned, decision making has been a prominent area of questioning for myself as of late. And considering whether or not this was a good decision, a right decision, or a virtuous one, isn't as clear to me as I feel it should be. I have yet to really consider altruism in the scope of Stoicism, as I have been engulfed by the concept of maximizing self-development. But in the pursuit of virtue, I believe that altruism in the sense that its purpose is to deliberately act in a manner beneficial to the welfare of another, is quite the virtuous activity. And in realizing this, I have also been led to consider the value of taking a step back from relentlessly focusing on doing all that I can to make myself a better person through primarily self-directed studies, and instead practicing virtue with attention and reference to others. </p>

<p>     As an extreme example, I considered a public dilemma. If I were on a walk for example, on my way to do some reading at a park, and happened to witness a boy with his foot caught in a fence, what am I to do? Observe, acknowledge, and pass by? Or observe, acknowledge, and assist? The answer here is clearly to help the boy right away. Now this decision, is one in which I would be deciding to abandon my current objective in pursuit of my studies, in order to benefit another. And although from this perspective it seems detrimental to self-development, that doesn't make it wrong. What good is a person who aims to better themselves, but never puts such developments, lessons, and improvements to practical use? And what better an application of one's faculties, than to assist another? Developing myself does do myself good, but why stop there? What reason is there to not help another equal out? Once again, the priority here is virtue, all that is good. And the lesson I've learned here, is to not be too narrow minded in my focus on self-development, but to also remember why it is I'm pursuing virtue in the first place. And on top of that, a Stoic not only has a duty to themselves, but also to all who occupy the same present moment as them. </p>
