---
layout: post
title: "Choices"
date: 2019-01-21 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Using Epictetus's dichotomy of control to separate what is truly up to us from what is not."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/choices/
---
<blockquote>
<p style="text-align:center;">"The chief task in life is simply this: to identify and separate matters so that I can say clearly to myself which are externals not under my control, and which have to do with the choices I actually control. Where then do I look for good and evil? Not to uncontrollable externals, but within myself to the choices that are my own…”</p>
<p style="text-align:center;">–Epictetus</p>
</blockquote>
When building a Stoic foundation for oneself, one of the most imperative steps is recognizing which factors in life are, and which are not in our control. What can we directly influence with our own choices, and what do we simply have to react to? It is in recognizing these factors that one is then able to come to terms with our reality. The weather, and actions of others for example, are matters that are out of our direct control, whereas on the other hand whether or not we do the laundry that needs to be done, and whether or not we choose to get upset over someone rear ending us on our way to work are in our direct control.

It is upon consideration of these thoughts that I, for example, have come to reconsider what exactly in my life I have control over. If I don't like my job, my major, or my own actions, there's nothing but myself keeping me from making changes in these areas. But what seems to be the common case, is that we put off making these changes for so long, that not only do we become comfortable with what we are not content with, but we see it as a burden to make a change for the better. No one <em>wants </em>to change majors three years into their program, but if you realize that you're miserable in your program, and know that there's another that will bring you actual happiness, then go for it. You're unhappy at your job on a day-to-day basis? Start sending applications, or work to make your work environment a healthier one. Not content with some of your own actions? Work toward becoming the person you'll be proud to be.

None of these are easy decisions to make, let alone changes to start. But the amazing thing is that we have the option to make those decisions and start changing. We possess free will, and mental faculties of our own, and with these can wipe the floor with the enemy we've come to known as comfort with unhappiness.

Some of these changes can be tiny,  such as choosing to read for at least half an hour a day, and some can be monumental such as choosing to pursue a new career. But regardless, they're each their own battle. Change is never easy, and neither is getting out of your comfort zone. But when the reward is a beneficial change in the long run, and something you know needed to get done, then what reason is there not to? Screw comfort and unhappiness, let's make the most of our free will and determination.

&nbsp;
