---
layout: post
title: "Regulating Reflection"
date: 2019-11-04 12:00:00 -0400
description: "On the difference between reflection that clarifies and reflection that just spirals."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/regulating-reflection/
---
<p>     It seems to be that we're often told, or reminded to "take a step back" and appreciate, reflect on, contemplate, consider, etc. This is often directed at us in many different contexts. But generally, it is done so in order to result in us participating in a state that encompasses all the aforementioned verbs, as well as others. To try and maintain accuracy, while making things more concise, we are asked to take a step back and enter a state of reflection. </p>

<p>     This technique has many, many benefits. It allows one to catch themselves when they're moving more quickly than they realize, working on more than they realize, when one is in need of a new perspective, maybe needs to reconsider, and even when one is failing to realize something. These are a few common situations in which this reflective state tends to provide aid. And although I do not disagree that taking a step back to reflect is beneficial, I feel that there is something about it that doesn't sit quite well with me. Whatever this something is, could either be very valuable, extraordinarily useless, or initially one of the two, and later on, to me, the opposite. </p>

<p>     But what is this something? The exercise of taking a step back implies a halt in one's current state of action or motion. It implies an interruption, or ceasing of momentum. And this, like I said, can prove invaluable to monitoring oneself. But I think what may trouble me, is that the need to do so implies either a lack of awareness, or a misguidance of it. If this halting reflection is necessary, I believe it would only be so were one in a situation or acting in such a manner that they are unaware of the way in, or extent to which they are acting. And this is normal, it happens. But mistakes are also normal, and they happen. But that doesn't mean that I wouldn't like to minimize them. And in terms of progress, or acting, I hate to have to halt, or cease progress, only to reflect and then become aware of any issues, mistakes, or particulars of that sort. In these situations, this helpful reflective technique steps in to resolve. And in doing so, it is taken that there must be something that needs to be resolved for this to be the case. So I feel that instead of relying on taking a step back, it might be more helpful to struggle with the difficulties of practicing maintaining a continuous state of awareness, deliberation, and presence in action. And in doing so, not only will we not have to halt our progress to step back and let reflection step in, but we may also move at a more controlled, comfortable pace that results in greater benefit. </p>

<p>     But what about post-completion scenarios? This, is where value is to be had. I was thinking that in these scenarios, after one has produced, reached,  or completed something that has been the process or movement constituting prior action, reflection is immensely valuable. To look back on what has been completed, even if done so in the ideally deliberate, present, and aware manner, can yield many benefits. But is this really reflection? Or is this still in the present, forward-moving process of deliberate awareness. In this case, let's say a case in which I have finished a painting after 9 months of work. If I, after coming under the initial impression that I have "completed" this painting, choose to look it over, is this a reflective, or presently aware act? If I try to scrutinize the painting in an attempt to find flaws, I am acting deliberately, presently, and am aware in doing so. I am not necessarily looking back at my actions in creation, or the many iterations that have been considered current states of the painting, but instead actively examining the product at hand. Does, in this case, reflection  necessitate doubt, or a sense of discontent with the past that this sense of active awareness does not? It appears to me so, at least in this moment. I may or may not have to "reflect" on that later (hope my first shot at semantic humor didn't fail there). </p>

<p>     What I believe is an idea to be acquired as a result of this, and to be further pondered over, is the potential of active awareness. An almost "regulated," present, continuous reflection on all. Doing away with the retrospective act that implies a misdoing, and aiming to cultivate this active, deliberate, and present skill. As all other seemingly virtuous skills, this comes off as a lot easier said than done. But with the difficulty comes even greater benefit in the long-term. And it is with this random thought, that rose from reflection, that I propose the "regulation of reflection" in order to produce an extremely beneficial state of present, deliberate, and active awareness in life and all one does.  </p>
