---
layout: post
title: "Questions Are So Simple, Yet So Complex"
date: 2019-03-13 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Working through simple-sounding questions about enjoyment, contentment, and how we spend our time."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/questions-are-so-simple-yet-so-complex/
---
<p>      What has yet to fail me in terms of providing me content with which to think and write about, has been my own experience. Currently I do have a situation which I'm trying to understand. There a few questions and concepts raised by this situation that I've considered. </p>

<ul><li>What is to be said about enjoying, simply for the sake of enjoyment?</li><li>Should I be content with time spent in such a manner that I could have predicted the events of that time prior to them occurring?</li><li>Is there value in a decision made to please another, if knowingly serving as a detriment to oneself? If so, how is one to approach making detrimental decision, and is there an extent to detriment at which it is no longer valuable? </li><li>Can any matter ever truly be considered a trivial one? </li><li>Is it possible to make a choice contrary to one's self-appointed guidelines and/or codes, yet avoid detrimental effects and still manage to please another? </li><li>How is a Stoic to approach the concept of social interaction in modern times?</li><li>Does the Stoic pursuit prioritize the pursuit of that which results in the acquisition of new knowledge and experience? </li><li>How does prioritize what is to be experienced?</li><li>Why am I asking so many questions and not answering any?</li></ul>

<p>     I feel that the more I explore any singular concern or idea, the more I discover questions I have yet to answer on a more basic level that facilitate that which I'm currently exploring. It would then seem that the best path to take would be to continue exploring such questions until I arrive at some sort of foundation or basic question off which to work my way upward instead, but the questions never seem to end. I would never have expected constructing and solidifying a sense of self, moral guidelines, and the pursuit of virtue to be this much more complex than I had originally imagined. In this case, all of this thought has stemmed from a simple situation regarding the concept of antisocial action, or unsociable action. Antisocial being unsociable action usually harboring some sort of harmful or malicious aspect as well, unsociable action simply being that expressing a "disinclination for social activity." In my recent studies of general philosophical teachings, I've been led to examine my own patterns of activity and social interaction, as these are what make up the contents of my life on a day-to-day basis. And for these studies, I have decided to start off without any thought as to those occurring in the workplace. </p>

<p>     What is to be desired in social activity and interaction? Pleasure, enjoyment, benefit, unhappiness, happiness? All of the aforementioned? How does one decide this? I have come to the conclusion that I haven't the slightest clue quite honestly, but I'd like to try and figure this out. If one is to partake in a normal conversation in which they discuss a few common ideas, all of which could have been predicted and/or have been discussed plenty of times before, have they gained anything? If one goes out with friends, enjoys a few hours out participating in a fun activity, what have they gained? In both of these cases lie benefits. Enjoyment, decompression, relaxation, comfortableness, a sense of belonging, development of connections with others, and so on. But let us then examine another set of choices. Let us say that instead of having that conversation, one deliberately avoided it and instead spent that same time reading, or simply participating in some introspection. Would they have gained more? Is the extent to which they've benefited the same, just yielding a different set of results? And if they instead chose to go participate in some other activity unbeknownst to them alone, and work through study and learning something new, the same questions are to be considered. How does one decide between the situations? Are they both just as valuable in their respective benefits, and both deserve equal intention and participation, or is one more beneficial? Does this depend on the person? What if leaning toward one or the other is detrimental to others or the self? Activity, social interaction, and decision making can get quite complex in this sense. And although the Stoic mentality might aim to simplify this, it does so to very difficult extremes to uphold in this day and age. And that being the case, is it simply the difficulty that comes with pursuing such a school of thought, or is it to be adapted for the self and present moment? </p>

<blockquote style="text-align:center;" class="wp-block-quote"><p>"Never regard as a benefit to yourself anything which will force you at some point to break your faith, to leave integrity behind, to hate, suspect, or curse another, to dissemble, to covet anything needing the secrecy of walls and drapes."</p><cite>Marcus Aurelius, <em>Meditations</em></cite></blockquote>

<p>      Now I don't intend for this post to necessarily lead to any answers, but if so, then so be it. Taking this excerpt for example, it is implied that I should simply not do anything which at its core is not a benefit to my well-being, in accordance with the values and standards that I hold myself to, and anything that I am not willing to openly disclose to whomever may inquire. These are direct, simplified directions guiding courses of action. But they get much more difficult when put into practice. If I've just finished working a 40-hour week, have been diligent and responsible in the other time during that week, is it wrong for me to go out with some friends and let's say just simply "hang out" for a few hours? Using the prior excerpt, let us see. Does it break my faith? If my faith is anchored in stoic thought, so long as my desire to participate isn't harbored in the pursuit of pleasure or avoidance of responsibility,  I think not necessarily. Am I leaving my integrity behind? This is a tricky one. I wouldn't necessarily be content with this decision in the sense that I know I could have spent these hours participating in something else that would have resulted in the furthering of sense of self or development of myself and my mind. But other than that, I don't think the act of participating in anything, even leisurely time, with friends is wrong by any means. So there's one issue that has already risen. Will it force me to hate, curse another, or dissemble? Not unless I make it so, and I would never desire for that to be the case. And would these activities be anything I would want to keep secret? Could I tell anyone about this? I believe so, even though there may be some who approve and some don't. Now having examined these questions, do we simply decide it is fine to go out since we have arrived at more agrees than disagrees? Or does the existence of a disagreement in itself hold enough value to require reconsideration? This is a very elongated expressing of the thought process that I participate in when a situation like this arises, though it really only takes milliseconds in the moment. And I'm struggling more and more every time I face this situation. </p>

<p>     Am I to consider these questions every time? Or is that extreme? Is it extreme, or is it simply being considered so as an excuse. Is this entire question one that does not require so complex and convoluted a consideration? This is probably a concept which I will continue to explore to further lengths in coming time, and will definitely be seeking input from others on as well. It's not necessarily a question of "should I go hang out, or should I go further myself?," but more so considering whether just as much progress can be made through these social activities, and if so, does it require deliberate effort from more than just myself? And is this progress a goal that should even be pursued relentlessly? Is such a boundless pursuit detrimental, or is the path of a stoic simply that difficult, and is that part of the reason it is so beneficial at the end? Well, time and further deliberate study will hopefully tell, as that will be my aim. </p>
