---
layout: post
title: "Avoidance, or Control?"
date: 2019-04-11 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Distinguishing genuine Stoic control from the avoidance and excuse-making it's sometimes mistaken for."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/avoidance-or-control/
---
<p>     One major Stoic idea, is that of controlling that which is within one's reach, and not letting themselves be influenced by factors that are not within their reach. It is a difficult concept to not only grasp, but also put into practice. It allows no room for complaining, blaming, ignorance, and so on. Many of which are techniques we have come to use as methods by which to alleviate our own guilt or shame in certain situations. I struggled with this initially as well. Understanding the idea wasn't too difficult, but putting into practice the thoughts and actions corresponding with the idea proved to be more challenging. Over time though, I felt I became pretty good at this -- or at least I thought.</p>

<p>     Through some recent reflection, I've noticed that although I am still doing decently well acting in accordance with this idea, I've found a detrimental loophole. I realized that not only am I attempting to put the idea into practice, but at the same time I've been expressing a tendency to avoid situations in which practicing this idea would be difficult. Now at first, this seems it could be a perfectly acceptable habit. If there is a chance that I don't <em>have </em>to be in a situation where determining external and internal factors is particularly difficult, then why would I subject myself to said difficulty, right? Yes? No? Or in this case, is it more of an answer of <em>it depends</em>? Answering yes supports the thought that there is no need to willingly subject yourself to avoidable difficulties. No on the other hand, can support the thought that it can be much more beneficial to one's progress in self-development to willingly take on these challenges in order to learn by way of difficulty. </p>

<p>     So in this case, what is best? Avoidance, deliberate attempts to control, or a balance of both? Or is it strictly situational? Is there even a right answer? I almost feel as if the more I try to figure these things out, the more difficult it gets to do so. Can it be as simple as going with my gut? Or is thoughtful contemplation much more beneficial? I know what I cannot control, and I know what I can. But I think what scares me, is the thought of putting my all into what I can control, and not getting the desired outcome. It isn't fun to accept that you can do all in your power as well and efficiently as possible to reap absolutely nothing of what you had hoped. But quite realistically, this is the case. At the end of the day, not only must one choose whether or not to accept that, but also choose whether or not to risk investing in each and every desired outcome. Am I to keep avoiding putting effort into that which I <em>can </em>control in hopes of influencing what I <em>cannot, </em>or am I to accept the ideas and play it safe. More on this to come. </p>
