---
layout: post
title: "Doctrine in Practice"
date: 2019-09-19 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Admitting the gap between preaching Stoic and existential ideas and actually living them under pressure."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/doctrine-in-practice/
---
<p>     In prior posts, I have stressed the teaching of Stoic and Existential doctrines to quite a great extent. I have placed them in hypothetical situations, set out plans of action, set guidelines for myself, etc. But all of that is to be considered absurd (devoid of meaning), if not put to practice. </p>

<p>     As of late, I feel I've had to put a few of the more challenging philosophical teachings to practice. I not only had to understand and be aware of them, but I had to embody them. One of these, is the refusal to let external factors have an emotional influence on the self. Quite honestly, it has been weeks since I have had any semblance of "quality" sleep, let alone any form of sleep in general (the reasons why are of no importance here). This has resulted in states of delusion, irritability, exhaustion, etc. Now I do not believe I'm unique in saying that I have struggled to function "virtuously" under these conditions, as I feel many would. But each and every day, I have tried to stress to myself that these are potentially beneficial circumstances under which to further develop some of the more imperative stoic and/or existential practices. I have been unsuspectingly surprised in all honesty, by the extreme difficulty in avoiding being triggered to react in ways that would defy said principles. Under these conditions, it seems that the rash, emotional, and almost non-deliberate (in the sense that my ability to rationalize has been less than adequate, therefore impulse has tried to become a driving force) actions have been attempting to act as the primary sources of response. This has not only led me to reconsider my dedication, but also to re-evaluate, and attempt to further my understanding of the doctrines. </p>

<p>     Seneca for example, stresses the importance of not attributing any value to external influences/events. This I took to heart, and have stood by. But once I stood knee-deep in these factors, it got tough. I caved a few times, and it was momentarily satisfactory. But quite literally, some of these moments were satisfactory for barely a matter of seconds. And immediately after, what lingered and had a more powerful effect, was the following feeling of defeat and weakness. I know that I have no control over these things, and I let them get a reaction out of me. But in these occurrences, realizations occurred. Not any that could have any immediate beneficial effects, but those that although they aren't necessarily pleasing, are the "correct," or "right" paths of action. Have I acted on them yet? Not all. Am I reluctant to? For some, yes. Hell, I might even be scared to. But had I not had these experiences, I would not have realized their potential. The stoics not only stress their doctrine, but the importance of practice, and the influence of experience in not only adding further dedication to the belief, but substance to it as well. It is easy to understand, and believe. But to act out provides an almost incorporeal, conceptual foundation to further solidify those beliefs. Epictetus uses the example of his iron lamp that he kept for example. He had no prior or standing conceptions of the relationship between stoic beliefs on materialistic value and this lamp he happened to own. But it was upon going through the experience of having it stolen, that he realized, and then proclaimed: "a man loses only that which he already has." He was a very respectable stoic, yet experienced a situation normal to the average person. This can be further supported by the influences of a slave such as Epictetus on the beliefs of the great emperor Marcus Aurelius. </p>

<p>     Through this all, I have come more to terms with the reality that stoicism is a philosophical school with its own doctrine. But it is not to be expected that any participating in this pursuit of virtue simply succumb to it and the path of right action flawlessly upon acceptance and belief. It is almost imperative to the development of the virtuous being that they experience the failure and difficulty of such an elusive goal. It is not the achievement of  effortlessly and perfect virtuous action that matters, but the results of the progress made toward said achievement. Did I struggle? Sure did. Am I still struggling? Sure am. Have I made philosophical developments? Sure have. And will I implement all new realizations? I will try. I have come to believe that not only experiencing these failures, but acknowledging, facing, and capitalizing on them, has prodigious effects on development, almost more so than the acceptance and practice of doctrine when not ever truly being tested. And if I am to instill my own meaning by means of stoicism into my existentially absurd existence, then I cannot shy away from the difficulty in such a pursuit, and instead should bathe in the difficulty, and continually strive to succeed in the pursuit. </p>
