---
layout: post
title: "Biomedical Moral Enhancement's Effect on Human Agency"
date: 2020-05-12 12:00:00 -0400
description: "A deeper follow-up look at how biomedical moral enhancement might specifically affect individual agency."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/biomedical-moral-enhancements-effect-on-human-agency/
---
<p>     Continuing the exploration of the question(s) posed by the prior post "Would Moral Enhancement Detract from Agency?," I will now be taking a deeper look into the effects of biomedical moral enhancements on human agency at an individual level. </p>

<p>     An imperative implication of theoretical biomedical moral enhancements (BMEs henceforth) is the potential for them to reduce an individual's potential to will immoral behavior. By attenuating counter-moral emotions in a person, they therefore are less likely to act on them as a result of their decreased influence as opposed to a cultivation of character. Initially, this seems fantastic. Honestly, who would complain about an almost certain increase in the likeliness of individuals to be better, more moral human beings? Because even taking their own benefits out of the equation this improvement benefits others as well. An improvement in moral aptitude isn't an improvement that provides a sort of advantage in the sense that becoming wealthier by being given money, or becoming stronger by taking steroids does, because it doesn't directly disadvantage anyone else also acting morally. If it disadvantages anyone, it it those who act immorally, and that stops the objection in its tracks due to the fact that they are acting immorally. At first this seems like a win-win, and if one were to analyze this by consequentialist standards it definitely is resulting in the greatest happiness, or goodness, for the greatest number. But we aren't taking such an approach. From the stoic, existential, and virtue theoretical perspectives we encounter a major issue here, and the issue isn't the immense benefit, it's the indirect effect (which we can't even confidently refer to as a detriment currently). </p>

<p>     The primary question here is whether or not the secondary effect of a decrease in the potential to act immorally discredits the potential benefit of BMEs, from the perspective of the areas aforementioned, though primarily Neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics (NAVE henceforth). NAVE places a large emphasis on the role of the individual in cultivating the virtuous life. The path to what we may consider to be "the good life" here is a path consisting of trained, contemplated, and executed virtuous action. And ideally this behavior after a certain point becomes the nature of the individual. Quite literally, the core of NAVE is agency. The potential for an individual to will action that aims to be virtuous, and as a result of continuous practice a cultivation of a virtuous way of life is fully dependent on the individual to be taken advantage of. And when considering for example an existential influence here, it is the individuals existence as a free agent that provides them with such a potential. And if they choose to pursue the virtuous lifestyle as a means by which to instill meaning into their inherently meaningless existence, then all of those results stem from the exercising of such agency. Stoicism can also put its two cents into this topic. Trying to live a life that for the most part abides by the "guidelines" of stoic philosophy is similarly dependent not only on the role of agency, but also the act of cultivation. And the benefits reaped by those who put these varying beliefs into practice are valuable in themselves, but also more so valuable in the sense that they were achieved by means of willed action and behavior. In almost all cases it is not only easier, but sometimes even more attractive to act in a manner contradictory to the philosophies aforementioned. This very commonly-present and problematic reality is what provides the rest of the basis of moral theory, and without it, what then do we or these philosophies have?</p>

<p>     Whether or not we look at agency as having degrees seems to be an important matter to address. If it is simply the presence of the potential to will immoral behavior that matters, then it is present regardless of BME insofar as they aren't implemented so drastically as to eliminate this potential. This attitude actually provides a very pleasant solution to this issue of a "loss of agency." On the other hand if we consider the importance of agency here as being the inherent potential residing in free will, and the results of BMEs as affecting this potential in such a way that reduces it from its inherently natural, and humanly level, then it can be considered as affecting the nature of an individual and therefore is quite the philosophical problem. If this is the case then I don't believe it is possible to condone, and therefore support BME and NAVE simultaneously, as the former detracts from the core of the latter. I am currently on the fence between these two, and as anyone who has read my prior posts is aware, these posts usually serve as a means by which to figure out my own position. </p>

<p>     On one hand we have a "nice" solution. If the degree is unimportant, and the existence of possibility is what holds value, then we can confidently pursue and support further research into BME while also being a proponent of NAVE. On the other hand it seems that we must forfeit this potentially promising endeavor in support of our core beliefs. I guess here all I can do is attempt to figure out how I approach the role of agency...</p>

<p>     Agency is valuable insofar that it provides us as humans with the potential to exercise free will. It is a fundamental part of human nature, and an unarguably imperative philosophical concept. But, does it have degrees? Up until this point we have approached this question within the context of BMEs that limit one's ability to act immorally by attenuating counter-moral emotions. This being the case, we can take a look at a few other points. When considering many disorders, diseases, and disabilities it becomes evident that hormone and neurotransmitter levels are constantly varied, and it can't conclusively be said that there is a perfect base-level at which each and every human begins at. Realistically we all vary in this respect, and disabilities, disorders, and diseases can make it fundamentally difficult for many people to operate in many respects, and moral behavior is certainly one of these.  This being the case, it may be correct to believe that the degree of agency is unimportant, as when taking this biomedical approach we must also acknowledge the potential for inherent deficiency and or abundance. And to acknowledge that provides a presupposition from which we can henceforth disregard the degree of agency present at any moment in an individual insofar as it is simply existent at all by means of relating it to the biomedical information also present in this field of Cognitive Science. </p>

<p>     Another matter that seems to be worth looking into is the potential for BME that aims to augment morality. Instead of attenuating counter-moral emotions, what if we look at potential BMEs that aim to possibly repair, or improve areas of the brain that in the near future are shown to play established roles in moral decision-making, or to repair or augment levels of neurotransmitters and/or hormones that are shown to also play these established roles. Though these are points dependent upon results of research, they are worth considering due to their very present potential to actualize in the near future. The same way that we perform many medical feats in order to improve, repair, save, and/or augment lives or the quality of life of many, so long as it doesn't disadvantage others (which we already established this moral route does not), then we can consider these possible practices as also abiding by the constraints of NAVE. </p>

<p>     Through this preliminary examination I believe I have overcome a bit of the overwhelming doubt that hit me upon initial consideration of the objection of restricted freedom, and can say with more confidence that I can continue not only to look into, but also support the BME area of Moral Cognition without forsaking my NAVE foundations. Of course there is still more to be examined and looked into regarding this topic, but for now this is where I stand at the conclusion of the present considerations. </p>
