---
layout: post
title: "Why Should We Be Interested In Moral Cognition?"
date: 2020-05-16 12:00:00 -0400
description: "An introduction to Moral Cognition as a field, and why the brain's role in moral judgment matters."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/why-should-we-be-interested-in-moral-cognition/
---
<p>     Well first of all, what the heck is Moral Cognition (MC henceforth)? Essentially MC is a field that studies the role of the brain in moral behavior, decision-making, and judgement. Many developments made in recent decades, as well as currently being made have yielded immensely valuable results regarding the relationship between our brains and morality. Most importantly it has shown that there is potential for a more substantial and declarative relationship to be established between the two. MC is a whole-brain affair and to be called a complex process would still be quite the understatement. Also, there are still many who fully oppose any sort of inquiry into this relationship on the basis of their own philosophical principles. This isn't to say they're wrong, nor to say that proponents of MC are necessarily right. But what I argue is not up for debate is that MC is a valuable field nonetheless. </p>

<p>     One of the biggest issues regarding morality in our modern day and age is the abuse of the subjectivity, ignorance of, and lack of clarity surrounding the concept of morality. It is thrown around without any substance to it, used to disadvantage others, interpreted in whatever the most suitable way is at the moment, and so many other fallacious manners. One of the most valuable potential results of MC is a way to combat all of these issues. The more we are able to understand about how morality functions in our brains, the more progress we make in the pursuit of eliminating the abuse and subjectivity of the concept. And that both directly, and indirectly results in myriad benefits. It strengthens the sense of individual moral responsibility, discourages and decreases the occurrence of the abuse of the  concept, and most importantly increases the general proficiency of individuals as moral agents. </p>

<p>     Following this is an improvement in the way we approach moral disagreements. Many would agree that the most prominent moral theories all have their flaws. Virtue ethics, consequentialist ethics, and deontological ethics all struggle in certain contexts. And often certain academics ascribe use of a specific theory to be better in certain contexts. This very sensitivity is part of what serves as the grounds for moral disagreement. And the worst part is, what trickier issue can we deal with than conflicting theories of morality, which in and of itself should aim to reduce this very sort of conflict. What it shows, is that although moral theoretical developments are some of the most impressive, valuable, and underappreciated developments, they still fall short when not adapted as we progress. Now this doesn't necessarily place much fault on the theories, as many issues present in society have been foretold and clearly warned against by philosophers such as Plato, to those such as Camus and Nietzsche, and yet we clearly ended up bringing about these forewarned and very much avoidable issues. But what it does do is highlight the difficult of these theories to yield their intended results in a contemporary context. Neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics might be the best suited in my opinion for the pursuits of MC, and in general to living a virtuous and ethical life in today's day and age, but it's not a theory that was constructed from its base to handle our modern global society. It is an adapted version of a specific theory that nonetheless tends to conflict with the others. </p>

<p>     This is where MC comes in. For each and every development resulting from the progress of research in the field we learn more and more about how we function as moral agents. And with this info we can begin to construct more well-founded, and potentially accurate theories of morality that aren't directed at the contexts of life in ancient Greece, or contemporary Europe. They can be cultivated within the contexts of our place in today's global society, but more importantly with a naturalized foundation representative of solidified evidence about the functioning of our own brains in relation the concept. Although this might seem like a small, unfounded, and potentially misdirected endeavor, I argue that is instead a field looking into one of the most important mysteries of human existence and nature. And these developments don't just affect one's personal life. They affect the ways in which individuals behave, governments function, global issues are prioritized and considered, and so much more. Once many of our current imminent issues are able to be addressed in a manner that highlights the almost undeniable immorality driving them forward, what can they argue as a result? That the benefits outweigh the immoral actions? Any solidified MC knowledge could easily prove that any sort of restructuring, repairing, and/or replacing with morality as its basis is immensely more beneficial and valuable, in many cases even in the short term as well as the long. </p>

<p>     So why should we care about Moral Cognition? Because if we care about ourselves, and potentially those around us, there can be nothing but benefits reaped from research and development in the field. Some of the greatest and most imperative philosophical questions have the potential to be linked to more concrete support, and also given information to work with that they've never had at their disposal before. And the value of that I argue, and therefore the field itself is unarguably present. </p>
