---
layout: post
title: "Why Should We Care About Morality?"
date: 2020-05-16 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Taking seriously the case that morality is disadvantageous, before making the case for why it still matters."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/why-should-we-care-about-morality/
---
<p>        Why should we care about morality? I think that is quite the fair question to ask. More often than not being moral comes off as having quite a few unattractive qualities, it coming off as being:</p>

<ul><li>Detrimental: As many people are aware, practicing a virtuous lifestyle often seems to disadvantage one more often than it does benefit them. And why would anyone want to do something that constantly made life harder for them?</li><li>Difficult: Becoming and maintaining a lifestyle as a virtuous human being is extremely difficult. It is not easy in the slightest. This immense difficulty justifiably warrants some hesitation.</li><li>Unclear: What the hell even is morality? How do I know what is moral? How are these different theories of morality able to coexist? How is this person's moral response justified when it is so contrary to mine? Why does my moral behavior seem to be ill-fit in the context of my societal life?</li><li>Ill-Fit: I argue that today, and in the context of our modern lives, moral living has never been so difficult to practice. Society quite honestly lends itself to immoral behavior much more than it ever does moral behavior. </li></ul>

<p>     So did I just write this to encourage people to say "screw morality" and reap the benefits of immoral behavior? Of course not. All I did here was lay out some common beliefs, portrayals, and attitudes about morality in contemporary contexts. In our modern day morality is almost never encouraged, naturally-assisted, taught, or placed in a comfortable role. Modern society quite literally sucks and embodies a majority of Nietzsche's condemnations as results of modernity. And this being the case, why should we even care about morality?</p>

<p>     Precisely because this is the state of our  modern society. Adhering to a theory of morality as a root cause I believe that a large majority of effects of any kind (beneficial, neutral, detrimental, etc.) from the most minute to the greatest extents all have at their base either a moral or an immoral influence. This being said, over hundreds, and even thousands of years there have been many more immoral foundations than moral. And as a result, we have our modern society that has at its core quite the carnival of immoral influences. From national governments, to international organizations, to educational systems, to groups of middle school students, to prisons, there exists the powerful presence of immorality. And as sad as it is, this makes it beyond difficult for morality to gain any traction. More powerful and influential frameworks in many contexts are adhering to immorally-influenced agendas than ever before, and that makes the support of, and spreading of moral goodness an <em>almost </em>impossible cause. </p>

<p>     It is this very acknowledgement of potential that harbors the most valuable semblances of hope. Immoral influence is present in many extremely important issues such as global warming, the detrimental effects of capitalism, the impossible lives our youth are being born into, and so much more. And if this potential for moral influence to right these wrongs is not taken advantage of, no good will ever follow. Educational systems will not be fixed. Social inequality will only worsen. National governments will continue to solidify interests in the economy and not its citizens. And those who wield moral influence will only have their potential for any effect to be had made smaller and smaller. Anti-intellectual agendas present in education are one of the most imminent dangers to our beneficial progress as a global society, and although I won't go into great detail as to why, they are one of the issues that needs to be most immediately combated. And moral action is the best tool for the job. What I'm proposing isn't an army of moral agents overthrowing systems. What I advocate is a more widely-accepted acknowledgement and understanding of the concept of morality, it's implications, and role in the functioning of our world. </p>

<p>     I became as interested in ethics as I am as a result of existential angst in the context of our modern day. Ethics isn't a pretty little gem lying around for people to discover, though every now and then it may happen in such a way. But more often than not it is in the presence of difficult times that ethics shines most brightly. I had lost hope in society, positive global development, and individuals themselves. It may sound extreme and daunting, but as is the way with existential dilemmas, and as is the case with our modern day regardless of the commonly present ignorance many either deliberately or unintentionally exercise. And although immoral influence has been at work for such a length of time, I believe that the influence of moral goodness is exponentially more effective. It doesn't take nearly as much moral behavior as it does immoral behavior to result in effects to the extent that immoral influences have. And that is why that small potential for moral change is so very valuable. </p>

<p>     It starts small. It starts with figuring out what one values. It starts with discovering what one is passionate about. It starts with struggling as the beginnings of a more moral lifestyle seem to make one's life increasingly more difficult, and almost never benefit the self. But with this, as is the case with many processes, the benefits greatly outweigh the struggles. And the greatest benefits come at the end of the greatest struggles. Contentment, a ridding of angst, confidence, and beneficial all change do occur as a result of moral decision-making behavior. And it isn't uncommon for many of these benefits to occur unbeknownst to the agent inciting them. But morality isn't pursued with moral dessert as the goal. It is pursued because it is naturally fundamental to positive development in all possible ways. My life has by no means gotten immensely easier after studying Stoicism, Existentialism, and the beliefs of various moral theories. But what it has become is immensely more satisfying. What it has gained is substance. And what it has done is open my eyes to so much of what is wrong, and the absurd reality of just how much is wrong. And if I can help even one individual choose to become even the slightest bit a better person, or more moral individual, then I have influenced an extremely positive change in many ways I will never know. And I argue that is the case with anyone, not just myself. Why should we care about morality? Because quite honesty moral goodness is one of the few concepts that cares about, and genuinely benefits, <em>us</em>.</p>
