---
layout: post
title: "Contentedness & Direction"
date: 2020-08-31 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Untangling contentedness from direction, and asking whether we need both to feel like we're living well."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/contentedness-direction/
---
<p style="text-align:center;"><strong>contentedness: </strong>the feeling experienced when one's wishes are met.<br /><strong>direction: </strong>a prevailing or general movement or inclination; a guiding or motivating purpose or principle.</p>

<p>     Stepping back into the realm of philosophy of life, I have chosen to touch on, and explore, the topic(s) of contentedness &amp; direction. I have seen, and read over quite a bit of discussion over being "content," in life, and what exactly this means, and its value to the self. There are many who believe a sense of contentedness is something very much worth striving toward, and others who believe it results in a state of stagnation in one's life. Considering it in the context of the definition aforementioned, at first look I do not like the sound of it being a result of the satisfaction of one's wishes. It comes across to me as implying that if one is striving for contentedness, they acknowledge the existence of a point in life at which one ceases to wish for more. In the spirit of openness, I acknowledge that there may be those that feel that way, and that is perfectly fine. But, I am not sure if I can come around to accept that it is possible for such a point to be reached. Because if one has been said to reach that point, it means that they do not wish for anything further. Not for continuous life, nor for death, nor for happiness, or anything. And if one is to say that this is the case because their wishes have been <em>met</em>, then do they not wish for it to stay this way? Technically, I guess this is possible if one truly does not care whether or not life stays that way once their wishes have been met, but that comes with the acknowledgement of the possibility that life may place them back in a position in which they have unfulfilled wishes, yet again. This is a very weird technicality, as it doesn't seem like most people would harbor such an attitude toward something of this sort. But logically, it does check out that one may truly achieve a state of contentedness so long as they don't care about whether or not it persists once it is achieved, though that seems very difficult to grasp.</p>

<p>     Now straying from the weird-sounding logical analysis of contentedness, I am here to discuss the concept as it exists in philosophy of life, and in doing so determine my own position on it. I believe that consideration of direction and the role it plays in the life of an individual is vital to this exploration. It seems to me that to have wishes that one desires to fulfill, then coexisting with that attitude is direction. It provides guidance and/or motivation, as well as inclinations throughout life. This, in turn, leads to directed potential fulfillment of one's wishes, and therefore a state of contentedness. In the context of a virtuous individual, this is where specifics need to be sorted out. As a proponent of stoic virtue ethics for example, I am constantly striving to cultivate and better the self in pursuit of being the "most virtuous" self that I can become. This alone I feel negates the potential for a state of contentedness, as one would never reach a state at which they are content with their progress since they would always be striving to be ever more virtuous. Is this beneficial or detrimental though? Does it have to be either? I think it <em>can </em>be either, but it does not <em>have </em>to be. One can participate in such an endless pursuit in a very unhealthy manner, just as well as in a truly beneficial and enriching manner. And it might even be the case that one is indifferent as to whether or not it is either, because they are at ease knowing that they are living a life of, or in pursuit of, virtue. This presents an opening for some devil's advocate input though. Can one be content, if they are in such a position of ease with living a virtuous life? Are they therefore, content with their situation/position? If the goal of a proponent of virtue ethics is to strive to be the most virtuous possible, then they are satisfying that desire by living a life in accordance with that pursuit. And by stating that, I believe I now must accept the conclusion that contentedness is a realistic possibility so long as one doesn't necessarily desire to become the ideal stoic virtuous sage. Now opinions on this ideal vary, as some believe it is meant to stand in as an illusory goal that drives the ethical theory, and some believing that it is just extremely difficult, though not impossible, and that individuals such as Marcus Aurelius for example, may have attained such a state. </p>

<p>     This being said, I do not necessarily feel like I can say that I am content, though I do believe I am trying to live a life in accordance with stoic virtue ethics. This, it seems to me, is because I feel that though I am living such a life, I have not progressed enough to feel a sense of contentedness with my position. But, that doesn't sit in accordance with the aforementioned points, and I am not even myself sure if I will ever reach such a point. There is definitely an existing dissonance between what I reasonably am stating, and then what I am realistically experiencing. This may be because I impose standards and expectations upon myself that present a perspective claiming that I can always be doing better. And if that is the case, my "wishes" are to constantly improve in varying philosophical, and in this case moral pursuits. And I personally will, at least I currently believe, never cease to provide myself with new checkpoints and requirements to meet those evolving standards. I am not sure if this is the most beneficial of attitudes, nor am I sure about whether or not their is an ideal attitude to have in this situation. </p>

<p>      What I am sure of though, is that direction, and <em>any </em>attitude toward the concept of contentedness, or at least deliberate consideration of those topics in relation to oneself is undoubtedly beneficial to the life of an individual. One does not necessarily need to have succeeded in solidifying positions on these concepts, but the process of thinking about them is extremely beneficial. It is important to understand the place of direction in one's life, and also very important to know how one feels about being content, and potentially pursuing contentedness. </p>
