---
layout: post
title: "Would Moral Enhancement Detract from Agency?"
date: 2020-05-11 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Responding to Thomas Douglas's paper on moral enhancement and whether it threatens human agency."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/would-moral-enhancement-detract-from-agency/
---
<p>     I have just finished reading Thomas Douglas' article "Moral Enhancement" published in the <em>Journal of Applied Philosophy, Vol. 25, No. 3, 2008</em>. First and foremost I must express my appreciation of the article and its marvelous job treating such a sensitive and tricky concept so cleverly, especially when addressing topics that are currently lacking certain solidified support systems. Upon finishing the article though, an objection posed to Douglas' theory by Douglas himself stuck with me -- the objection of "restricted freedom." </p>

<p>     To put it into context, the topic of Moral Enhancement as discussed by Douglas in this article, as well as researched by myself refers to an enhancement able to be described as:</p>

<blockquote class="wp-block-quote"><p>"A person morally enhances herself if she alters herself in a way that may reasonably be expected to result in her having morally better future motives, taken in sum, that she would otherwise have had."</p><cite>Douglas, 229</cite></blockquote>

<p>Now these enhancements can consist of a variety of methods, though for the purposes of this post only biomedical enhancements as well as moral enhancement resulting from a desire for self-change by means of moral training, introspection, and other self-intended methods will be referred to. Now I have developed quite the interest in moral cognition and the potential for moral enhancement ('moral' to be commonly omitted henceforth) of individuals both in general, as well as resulting from developments in moral cognition  research; for example conclusive data on neural constituents of moral cognition, which in turn could very much influence the biomedical enhancements aforementioned.  And up until now I have acknowledged detriments of such enhancements in the sense that they harbor the potential to be misapplied, but one thing I hadn't considered in the way that I am now is the question of whether or not biomedical enhancements of this sort would take away from the freedom of an individual to act upon <em>bad </em>motives, and therefore take away from an individual's agency. </p>

<p>     One of the most attractive features of the aforementioned self-intended methods driven by a desire for self-change is that they take advantage of the immense potential benefits of our own agency as individuals. They not only desire such an enhancement, but will it to occur by means reliant on their own actions and decisions (effectively, their own behavior). Now this by no means detracts from any sense of agency as it is itself the driving factor for this sort of enhancement. On the other hand biomedical enhancements don't share this method. The sort of biomedical enhancement discussed by Douglas for example (defined prior) doesn't function with the intent to augment moral behavior directly. Instead it focuses on attenuating the detrimental influences, primarily those stemming from emotion (deemed <em>counter-moral</em> emotions by Douglas), that hinder moral proficiency. This is where the fogginess surrounding agency creeps in. </p>

<p>     In attenuating these <em>counter-moral </em>emotions present in an individual one can justifiably argue that they have therefore reduced the potential of the individual to will immoral behavior. Now although this can unarguably be considered a beneficial and/or desired result, it is the unintended (though most likely presumed) effect of the minimization of agency that poses an issue. From a philosophical perspective it can be said that the indirect effect resulting from such an enhancement is more ethically valuable in terms of its questionable nature than the intended benefit. Much of what moral theory focuses on is the role of the will of the individual as an agent in their moral and/or immoral behavior(s). And if one is performing better morally as a result of a limited ability to perform otherwise it then brings up a question regarding the fact that although yes, the individual is willingly acting in a "morally good" way, it is simply because they lack the potential to act otherwise. And if so, is it truly a manifestation of their agency, or simply all that they can do, and don't quite possess the faculties by which to do otherwise. This is a very serious implication of such an enhancement, and poses very extreme existential issues to the acceptability of such a method. It has forced me to now reconsider my position on the topic, as well as the effects that biomedical enhancements have on the freedom of an individual, as well as the benefit(s)-detriment(s) relationship present. Because even if I focus on the latter, it then draws from a consequentialist form of support, which I have openly denounced in my favoring of Neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics which also has at its core, agency as being extremely valuable. </p>

<p>     This topic can most definitely be expected to be one that I pursue more thoroughly in the coming future, and although I am not turning back on all my support for and interest in the potential of moral cognition, these are questions that most definitely need to be addressed throughout its development. </p>
