---
layout: post
title: "Lacking Consideration of the Practical"
date: 2020-05-02 12:00:00 -0400
description: "From childhood astronaut dreams to a growing pile of knowledge, questioning whether learning for its own sake is enough."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/lacking-consideration-of-the-practical/
---
<p>     From the initial days when I wanted to be an astronaut, to the very recent ones that I have spent focused on acquiring more and more knowledge surrounding my topics of interests there has always been a recurring theme of the desire to acquire knowledge. Now that sounds great, I doubt many would say that someone having a desire to learn is an inherently detrimental inclination. It has definitely been extremely beneficial,  and I do not doubt that it will continue to be so. The catch is that the desire to learn more has always been my <em>sole </em>focus. "What's next?" always referred to what should I be looking into or studying next. But what I've failed to do throughout all of this time is stop and ask myself "What now?" in a realistic and practical sense. </p>

<p>     As of late I have been reading, watching, and listening to quite a lot from Dr. Henry A Giroux out of Canada's McMaster University. In short Giroux is a scholar who writes extensively on matters such as Critical Pedagogy, the effects of Neo-Liberalism, the role of the youth in our present times, authoritarianism in a modern context, and much more. Now though at first these issues may seem a bit different from some of my interests such as moral cognition, ethics, and philosophy of life, its necessarily the interdisciplinary relations that have been valuable to me. From the passionate, engaged, and structured manner in which Giroux writes and speaks, to the content within these forms themselves, a key point he emphasizes is <strong>agency</strong>. He himself is an extremely well-educated, active, and involved individual, and he does practice what he preaches. As well as this, he highlights many structural issues present in all aspects of modern life, and brings up many "sensitive" issues regarding how blatantly ignorant so much of the populace is to very obvious and prominent issues affecting so many. He has been criticized and rejected for his beliefs and opinions because they call to attention much of what the top brass would like to keep out of the mainstream media and societal forefront, and that in itself speaks wonders. But what's important here is that Giroux takes his role as an agent seriously, and exercises his agency as a result of all that he has worked for and learned. </p>

<p>     These themes Giroux presents not only through his works on Critical Pedagogy, but also through his actions and behavior have led me to the realization that although I have pursued my studies to many lengths, I have failed to consider what it is that I plan to really do with them. Of course I've had general end-goals, and career prospects, etc. But I have failed to directly examine what it is that I would like to accomplish, implement, and or quite simply <em>do</em> with all it is that I'm learning. In my pursuits of moral cognition studies for example, the implications of even a semblance of development in the field instantaneously have ties to quite a diverse variety of fields, and moral cognition as a whole has an immense practical value. This being the case, I realized that I need to not only realize this fact but also focus on what it is that I want to do with my studies. And not only at the "end" of my university studies, but also throughout. It needs to cease to be a thought that "at the end of...." or "after this..." and begin to be "alright I what can I do with what I just learned?" and "where will I take this next?" They're both equally important questions, and the latter pair more importantly harbors intent to apply knowledge throughout the learning process as well as that desire to further the knowledge, which is a much more complete and valuable mindset than that which I held prior.</p>

<p>     In all honesty the primary reason I lacked a consideration for practical application of my knowledge is that as a main result of my preliminary and initial philosophical studies I had lost a lot of faith in the modernity. I had lost faith in the effectiveness of a government and its citizens, in education when placed under the constraints of a neo-liberal and capitalist-driven framework, and quite seriously in the progressively beneficial development of humans. This outlook had culminated throughout my existential and stoic studies, as the more I learned and studied the more obvious so many wrongs became to me. In all aspects of life, and especially in governmental frameworks present globally, there is an unbelievably immense presence of wrongdoing, misrepresentation, and integration of what are supposedly foundational values and beliefs. And this is what philosophy opened my eyes to. </p>

<p>     Giroux's influence actually did a lot to start to remove me from such a pessimistic mindset. His works specifically regarding Critical Pedagogy and the role of education reminded me very much of many classically Greek philosophical beliefs regarding the role of a citizen in a state, and what the aims of education should be. But most importantly, through his actions and works, he has reminded me that philosophy is also a tool that I should be looking to constantly use as a means by which to improve. And this applies to all aspects of life, from the most minute to the grandest. Moral cognition has great beneficial potential for myriad realms, and I will definitely be pursuing a more active approach to identifying potentials for beneficial implementations of anything which I learn in my pursuits of knowledge. Ultimately I aim to cultivate a greater moral presence in our modern society, and plan to use neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics as the foundation for that goal. Due to Giroux and reflections on classical Greek and Roman philosophy a sense of consideration for practical application has been revitalized, and I will attempt to further cultivate and apply that sense throughout my studies. </p>
