---
layout: post
title: "How Do I View Morality?"
date: 2020-05-16 12:00:00 -0400
description: "After many posts leaning on Stoicism, Existentialism, and Virtue Ethics, finally asking what morality means personally."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/how-do-i-view-morality/
---
<p>     Throughout the course of my posts on this site the presence of the concept of morality has been vital. Many of my interests lie within the realm of Ethics, and even my pursuits in Moral Cognition and Philosophy of Life are driven by moral influences. But although I have mentioned and utilized concepts such as Stoicism, Existentialism, and Virtue Ethics throughout these posts, I don't feel as if I've ever given a valuable and substantive enough breakdown of how I view morality. The main reason for this, is the reason I started this blog in the first place. Morality is a tough concept to work with. And I myself don't believe that I have solidified my own moral theory, or approach. It is definitely a process, and it might be one that never ends for all I know. But what I can do, and plan to do here is discuss my moral foundations, current perspectives and beliefs, and outlook toward future moral development for myself. </p>

<p>     My moral foundations are comprised of influences discussed aplenty throughout my posts. Most importantly we have three main influences:  Existential Philosophy, Stoic Philosophy, and Moral Theory. My introduction into the field of Philosophy came at the hand of Albert Camus and existentialism thoroughly destroying any peace of mind I had while living my life prior to discovering existential philosophy. It was quite a rude, abrupt, and quite honestly depressing introduction. But most importantly it was probably the most important knowledge-based discovery in the course of my life thus far. I experienced angst, confusion, questioned identity, and all of the common results of existential philosophy. But at the end of it I had made strides in my intellectual and philosophical development. I solidified my belief that although life is inherently meaningless I can nonetheless choose to instill my own meaning into it, and most importantly that my own free will and agency are the most valuable parts of myself as an individual, and a majority of what makes me able to consider any concept of self at all. Following my being thrown into existential waters without the knowledge of how to swim I discovered Stoic philosophy. This is where a lot of my progress occurred. Stoic philosophy helped me cultivate a lifestyle, it helped me figure out how I wanted to approach my existential conclusions, it helped me further and more adequately navigate the realms of Philosophy, and so much more. What the combination of studying these two most importantly resulted in though, was the beginning of my cultivation of a personal moral profile.</p>

<p>     How does someone who had fallen into the hole of existential dread and meaninglessness, and then studied the miraculous strides of Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Seneca draw moral conclusions from such a journey? I really just want to say I haven't a clue, but I just honestly am still a bit confused regarding that matter. As a result of these studies I drew various conclusions. First and foremost, I wanted to focus on self-improvement. Secondly, I wanted to learn more about, and within these and other realms of philosophy. Thirdly, the world really does suck in some ways. And lastly, I wanted other people to not necessarily follow in these footsteps, but experience this sort of development, and have the veil of ignorance removed from their gaze. One of the most valuable exercises I started partaking in to a much greater and more focused extent is introspection. Without introspection none of this would have been possible in all honesty. For example my post on Core Values is probably one of the most influential exercises I have ever taken part in, and it was a result of deliberate and difficult introspection. And throughout all of these developments I began to learn more and more about moral theory.</p>

<p>     If there was anything I knew right away throughout my studies in moral theory, it was that I am not a fan of consequentialist ethics as a lifestyle. The original Trolley Car problem may give it some credence in a certain context, but what that problem does well is emphasize the shortcomings of varying moral theories, and the importance of great consideration when maneuvering morality, of both one's own, and other beliefs, ideas, and thoughts. This also showed me not to be too closed-minded, because I tend to really commit to a theory once I begin to like it. When it came to deontological ethics, the lack of practicality and consideration for context-dependent thought made me quite uncomfortable. It is nice to believe that there are certain universal truths about morality, but certain "duties" don't seem to be infallibly supportable in all situations. But when it came to virtue ethics, I felt content. Virtue ethics to me felt like the best solution to my instillation of meaning into an existential existence, and the best framework by which to build a stoic lifestyle. But most importantly it provided me with a way to approach moral judgement, behavior, and decision-making that I felt confident and comfortable with. It didn't come off as possessing the potential for wrongly-intended justification that consequentialism harbored, and seemed to be able to handle many of the tricky situations that deontology couldn't. It didn't focus on each and every decision itself, or following a set of rules. Instead it focuses on the cultivation of the self in such a way that aims to result in a constant state of virtuous pursuit and success. The stress of virtue ethics isn't on being a moral agent. What it focuses on is simply being the best self you can be, and partaking in that which fuels that result, and by doing so moral greatness is achieved without it necessarily being the primary focus. </p>

<p>     So what is my moral perspective? It's a mixed, and not fully solidified one. Part of my moral foundation stems from my non-religious and heavily-existential view on the nature of existence and meaning. Another part of this foundation is built on the desire to live a lifestyle akin to that of the stoics. And the rest of this foundation is primarily built on my endeavors through moral theory studies. I've grown to be a strong proponent of virtue ethics, but not so much that I completely discredit other moral theories, and also a proponent of the view that existing moral theories are all inadequate in their own way, and that modern developments are yielding immensely valuable knowledge that warrants a reconsideration of and new work on moral theory. That which assists in an individual acting in a virtuous manner, and following what I believe to commonly be almost natural answers to moral decision-making (not gonna get into moral cognition and naturalized ethics here) are the main drives for my moral behavior. For example, lying is unarguably wrong. I am not saying that it doesn't have benefits sometimes, or detriments. What I am saying is that honesty is a virtue, and lying is not. And virtuous behavior adheres to that belief. Utility, convenience, practicality, and conformity aren't to be considered here, but adherence to virtues is. I do believe that my own moral perspective will definitely grow, develop, and possibly change more than I anticipate with time, and definitely will develop as moral cognition developments are made, so none of this is to be taken as my declaration of absolute moral perfection, but simply as a broad overview of my personal and current moral stance. </p>
