---
layout: post
title: "Intent, Expectation, Results, and the Global Context of Biomedical Enhancement"
date: 2020-08-16 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Examining biomedical enhancement through intent, expectation, and outcome, and its uneven global implications."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/intent-expectation-results-and-the-global-context-of-biomedical-enhancement/
---
<p>     It comes as no surprise that the concept of biomedical enhancement is surrounded by a great deal of debate and controversy currently, and I am quite glad that it is in all honesty. It is a topic that warrants attention, care, doubt, advocacy, and general thought. There are many who may never have even heard of, or paid any thought to this topic, but the reality is that biomedical enhancement is not getting the attention it desperately requires in its early stages. Biomedical enhancement is a topic that will soon be affecting the lives of individuals across the globe. It will affect them directly as individuals, indirectly as nations, and drastically as a species. And though questions of ethics have not been left out of the equation, I believe they are most definitely behind where they need to be in relation to the research, development, and intellectual progress surrounding the subject. The purpose of this post though, is to specifically address the roles that intent, expectation, and results play in the field of biomedical enhancement.</p>

<blockquote class="wp-block-quote"><p>"Biomedical enhancements are typically classified according to their target - the capacity or trait they they (aim to) amplify or introduce - or their mode of operation. Widely discussed <em>targets </em>of biomedical enhancement include physical appearance, sporting and musical abilities, memory, attention, intelligence, positive mood, and, in recent discussion, moral capacities. Life extension.. is also classified as an enhancement. <em>Modes </em>of biomedical enhancement already in use include pharmacological and surgical intervention, and reproductive selection following pre-implantation or pre-natal genetic testing. Commonly discussed possible future modes include genetic modification (somatic or germline), brain-machine interfacing, and deep brain stimulation." </p><cite>"Enhancement, Biomedical" , Thomas Douglas </cite></blockquote>

<p>The intent of any biomedical enhancement is of great value when analyzing its ethical context as an individual act as well as a concept. What do the individual and/or implementer have in mind when considering the desired ends of such an enhancement? Does intent have the potential to override the expected, or even actual results? Do the expected or actual results override intent? These are all very important questions. Let's say, for example, that a student has suffered damage to their prefrontal cortex. Let us also pose the hypothetical context in which neurosurgical developments now allow the surgeon to not only repair the damage, but also further enhance the synaptic plasticity of the patient's prefrontal cortex, further promoting cognitive development, and facilitating learning  as well as their cognitive capacities. The surgeon intends to help a patient recover from a very serious injury, as well as to leave the patient with enhanced cognitive capacities (at least in the PFC) that exceed those existing prior to the injury. This comes off as an unproblematic situation initially. But what if this resulted in that student then performing so much better than others that they landed many opportunities, scholarships, and won competitions that other students may well have landed/won had that student not had their cognitive capacities enhanced. This also applies to situations where prosthetic limbs have unintentionally boosted athletic performance. Intent in these contexts seems acceptable and unproblematic, but the actual results seem to raise issues. </p>

<p>     When considering intent in these contexts, it is very hard to conceive of attributing greater value to intent than results in cases wherein the results are problematic. But when the results are favorable, then intent is likely to be praised. It seems that what matters in the realm of biomedical enhancement is that the enhancements themselves must harbor moral and valuable intent, and that the intent of the seekers of enhancement must be considered separately to the intent of an enhancement in an ethical context. If this is the case, then intent can be considered valuable in its own right, and doesn't need to inherently stand above or below expectations or actual results. </p>

<p>     When considering many of the problematic results, for example the few that we have hypothetically addressed already, it may seem that we must simply devise proper and adequate regulation for these enhancements. But in the case of the student for example, would it be considered morally sound to deny them a chance at the aforementioned opportunities as a result of an injury? That seems quite cruel. But do we then let those who can potentially afford those cognitive enhancements to simply tread over the less fortunate? That seems equally as cruel. Do we then deny these enhancements as purchasable operations? Well, then is it acceptable for those who happen to get injured to then enjoy lives advantageous to those who have not suffered injuries? None of these situations come across as realistically attractive in any way. And what makes it worse, is that we are discussing situations in which their is a pure, genuinely good intent backing the enhancement. </p>

<p>     What about what is expected? Here I feel the need to simultaneously discuss actual results, as there is quite a bit of overlap. If one expects certain results from an enhancement, but there are unforeseen effects, negative or positive, do the expectations matter, or do the actual results carry more weight? Or does it simply matter that there was morally sound intent backing the enhancement? It is good practice to always prepare for the best as well as the worse, and to always expect the unexpected, but should enhancements even be carried out if there are chances for unexpected results to impact our lives as we know them? And if one is always prepared to expect the unexpected, then even the unexpected can be considered an expected result during the actual process of enhancement. This being said, the actual results may never truly be a result not potentially considered prior to its actualization. If a newborn baby has been stripped of any and all undesirable features, and lives a very advantageous life when compared to those around them as a result, what are we to think? Does the intent then carry more weight? Was it done because the parents desired an advantageous life for their child, or was it done due to medical necessity? Does the former harm the ethical standing of the results and/or enhancement more so than the latter? </p>

<p>     It seems that the biggest overarching issue when considering intent, expectation, and results of biomedical enhancement is dissonance. Biomedical enhancements harbor immense potential and value to truly better the world that we live in. But, the world we currently live in doesn't seem to be one in which their is a great deal of room for biomedical enhancements to truly benefit more so than harm our global state. Many issues that arise when considering the ethics of biomedical enhancement come to be as a result of issues that have existed prior. The issues of wealth gaps, as well as economic and educational disparities already seem to pose potential issues to any sort of biomedical enhancement offerings and how they should be carried out. The issues of racism, oppression, ethnocentrism, and general superiority complexes already pose similar issues to the topic. Their is a very serious issue present in the dissonance between the rate of scientific research and development, philosophical thought, politics, and global intellectual development. And so long as this dissonance continues to grow larger, more prominent, and problematic, research and development for example will run into many obstacles, be forced underground in some cases and pose to be quite problematic, and never get the chance to realize a great deal of potentially beneficial effects. So, yes intent, expectation, and actual results are all important. But we don't currently have the luxury of being able to philosophically analyze their roles due to the lack of a context in which the overarching topic itself isn't already in a very unfortunately situation. This being the case though, we must find a way to work around this, because development won't be stopping just because there are issues present elsewhere. </p>
