---
layout: post
title: "Can Neurobiology Teach Us Anything about Consciousness?"
date: 2020-09-01 12:00:00 -0400
description: "A response to Patricia Churchland's work, asking what neuroscience can and can't tell us about consciousness."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/can-neurobiology-teach-us-anything-about-consciousness/
---
<p>     Upon reading through Patricia Churchland's "Can Neurobiology Teach Us Anything about Consciousness?," I felt that it was an interesting and unique piece warranting extended interaction. This being said, I will be providing a sort of opinion/response piece here in which I acknowledge, contemplate, and provide my own feedback on that which was written, in attempts to: 1) Further my own understanding of the work 2) Develop my own opinion on the matter(s) 3) Exercise literature reviewing and opinion/response generation skills 4) Provide others with a simpler entryway into a more niche topic.</p>

<p>     First and foremost, the question doubling as the title is a very important one in the cognitive sciences, and subsets such as philosophy of mind, cognitive neuroscience, psychology, neurobiology, and so on. Churchland's perspective is one that rejects the Cartesian theory of mind that proposes interaction between an immaterial soul/mind and a material body in attempts to understand features such as consciousness. One of the goals of her form of reductionist approach is to use "neuroscience [to] reveal the physical mechanisms subserving psychological functions," and also potentially reduce "psychological phenomena to neurobiological phenomena" (Churchland, 23). These are quite bold claims and attitudes to support, but I do believe they deserve a great amount of credit. As of late I believe I have ended up more on the side of those such as Churchland and William Casebeer when it comes to these topics. And though I am in the process of furthering my knowledge outside of the philosophical realm into more of computer science and neuroscience, I do believe I have made enough progress thus far to knowledgeably endorse or disagree with claims in the field. </p>

<p>     One of the points made by Churchland in this work, I feel lends itself very well to addressing such a hard split from very popular Cartesian perspectives. This point was, or more possibly more accurately, this response to an objection was her addressing objections on the basis that such a scientific goal is "absurd" and/or incoherent. Many claim that it lies in the realm of impossibility to be able to explain something as mysterious, complex, and potentially illusory as consciousness by neurobiological means. And I certainly understand why many feel that way, as it does come across as being near impossible to claim to understand, especially outside of Cartesian theory. But, as Churchland effectively argues, other concepts that we now understand were originally met with similar ignorance. She mentions a few of these such as "the malleability of metals, the magnetizability of iron, valence, electron shells," (Churchland, 27) and a few others. This is very important because when it comes to a topic as difficult, complex, and mysterious as consciousness, <em>especially </em>when we are tending to approach such issues from a more commonly interdisciplinary perspective, a willingness to re-evaluate, consider, and embrace the approach of Churchland's "reductive contact" (Churchland, 29). Allowing such enriching reductive contact to be made across disciplines in efforts to fully understand concepts is immensely valuable, and imperative to the pursuit of endeavors such as understanding consciousness. And to do this effectively all parties must be open, willing to change their positions, and also deliberately tossing ignorance to the curb. She even makes light of the issue by joking "that a scientifically plausible theory sounds is a criterion only of its not having become a common coin, not of its being wrong" (Churchland, 28).  </p>

<p>     In more of a general sense Churchland's work always comes off as satisfying through its support of hybrid research directives, very composed acknowledgment and treatment of counters, and its effectiveness at setting a groundwork for further discussion that eliminates any sort of groundless bias or hindrance to the topic at hand, for example, the perspective arguing "I cannot imagine how you could get <em>life </em>out of <em>dead </em>stuff" in response to attitudes held prior to developments in molecular biology. With not only the massive beneficial potential that lies in interdisciplinary studies and their approaches to imperative questions, but also the dire need for such studies, this attitude conveyed through Churchland's work is something that I hope to see present in more work of individual disciplines, as it is something that is practically necessary within the cognitive sciences already. </p>

<p>     She does dive into more scientific discussion of research as well, which proved to be quite insightful and interesting. After dismissing Searle's objections that function off of the basis that an approach to justify causality as opposed to being open to justifying a state of being in relation to consciousness, she touches on what are hopeful beginnings into furthering such neurobiological endeavors into understanding consciousness. One of the major hindrances to this endeavor is the constraint satisfaction problem that she presents. To summarize, it is quite difficult to find psychological phenomena that meet a very demanding set of research criteria, and more importantly, <em>enough </em>of such phenomena to start to "generate a theory constrained by data at many levels of brain organization -- sufficiently con-strained so that it can be put to meaningful tests" (Churchland, 32). Visual awareness, as well as sleep/dreaming/wakeness (SDW) states are two "ins" that Churchland provides in her work. Visual awareness serves as one of the phenomena that have a large, rich, and existing research-driven and literature-filled environment. It has its foot in varying fields, such as neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, psychophysics, and so on, providing a very valuable entryway into developing the aforementioned theory that encompasses varying levels of brain organization. She touches on the Crick hypothesis briefly, which to avoid any rambling or terms that begin to enter great specificity, addresses neuronal structures that are taken to make salient differences in relation to visual awareness of stimuli. The point here though, is that he provides means by which "to approach a problem so tricky it is often scrapped as unapproachable" (Churchland, 34). Secondly, she presents readers with the Llinas hypothesis which focuses in on the phenomenological and neurobiological differences between the SDW states mentioned prior. Changes in awareness, and other dramatic changes of characteristics of brain states combined with a plethora of data ranging across many species, subjects, and forms of data make this yet another undoubtedly valuable entryway into studying consciousness from this position. I will refrain from going into more detail on this part in order to avoid making this into an explanation of a specific scientific area.</p>

<p>     Though I already have been shifting my attitude on the concept of consciousness in the cognitive sciences to one more akin to Churchland's and Casebeer's,  this paper provided me with data I was unaware of prior, very helpful analyses of counterarguments, and very effective academic maneuvering of a very sensitive, complex, and difficult issue. I am a big fan of Churchland's works, and have studied a large majority of her teachings through various platforms, and even some of her husband's. In terms of a more general approach to interdisciplinary studies I believe she does a fantastic job emphasizing its importance, and also necessity. And when considering her stance on the role of neurobiology in the pursuit of understanding consciousness, I do believe that an open mind must be had to approaches that reject Cartesian beliefs, and also function on the very outer edges of the scientific field. I do believe the cognitive sciences will be one of the most important fields in many academic endeavors in the coming times, and especially important in attempts to solve lasting philosophical, biological, psychological, and other issues by means that have never even been conceived of. I will later be tying much of this work into other fields such as enhancement, ethics, and other cognitive science topics I have touched on prior as well. </p>
