---
layout: post
title: "Contemporary Constraints On Virtuous Living"
date: 2020-01-17 12:00:00 -0400
description: "Arguing that modern life is structurally harder on virtuous living than we tend to admit."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/contemporary-constraints-on-virtuous-living/
---
<p>     With each and every day that passes, I experience more and more of what our modern existence consists of. Each and every day I am exposed more and more to what our world today is like. And  with each and every day that passes, my opinion that contemporary existence attempts to place constraints on moral excellence, or virtuous living, becomes more strongly held. What I have come to notice is that even with all these "self-help" movements, and seminars on living healthy and responsible lives, real progress isn't being made as efficiently as not only would you expect, but also not as efficiently as it initially appears to the masses. Most of these movements are simply providing us with a new facade behind which to live. Yes one may have improved their diet, worked on managing time, and produced a more balanced routine, but what is one doing with the life that quite simply, is now a very-well organized and primed life. All of these accomplishments are great, don't get me wrong. This is all progress that needs to be made. But it goes to waste if after establishing a living atmosphere that fosters development and growth, one doesn't take correct advantage of it. </p>

<p>     Modern living has come to promote and advertise these "correct" ways of living "healthy" lives, but in such a manner that it simply leads to a new trend of competing to see who can put up the facade expressing the most extravagantly cultivated, balanced, healthy, and productive lifestyle. And although there are a great deal of people who have not fallen into this trap, the existence and occurring of these trends makes it more difficult for them to truly develop a virtuous life, and indirectly discredits their much more valuable progress, because it may not have as great a standing in the world of the faux self-help movement. Taking this a step further, we can examine the constraints of practicing and cultivating a virtue in modern times.</p>

<p>     Lying. The big "no-no." Yet probably one of the most commonly practiced unvirtuous exercises on a daily basis. Why is this the case? I can't say anything definitively, but I have a few ideas. One being a shift toward acknowledging the issue of sensitivity by withholding information. This has become so common a technique, that now instead of the lying or withholding of information being viewed as wrong, honesty in this situation is now looked at as horrendously insensitive. Many cannot believe the "audacity" one must have to possess to be truthful, and how insensitive they are being in doing so. This trend of lying to protect has gone so far, that  when many people are in a situation in which they will either be lied to, or told the truth, many times they inherently expect and hope for the "caring" response that acknowledges their sensitivity, and by repeatedly being delivered such responses they in turn lack the moral and personal benefits that arise from being told the truth, even when it is not the most initially desired response. This is visible not only on a casual person to person level, but also on greater plains such as information distribution (media, advertising, news casting, etc.). </p>

<p>      Another issue is the fact that there is currently a huge divide in the population. On one side, we have more "traditional" people who "don't have time to worry about such nonsense, as there is work to be done." And on the other, we have those who are truly interested in improving, and developing virtue in their own lives. This casts a shadow down on the latter, making it seem as if these initial hopes to cultivate the self are pointless, aimless, and far from beneficial. But the truth is, self-development is an arduous endeavor. And much of history has shown us that many have realized just how scary it is to be faced with what truly matters, and to realize decades into ones life that they don't even really know themselves, nor can they tell anyone what they've really done to cultivate a moral life. They get so caught up in the proposed superseding importance of modern life, that they fail to really examine themselves, and in turn fail to realize what truly matters in the surrounding world. The real issues are the scariest ones to face, and the hardest to realize. But until one, or many, choose to embark on that path regardless of the difficulty, then that won't become known. Modern life doesn't just advertise misleading self-development, but also places sly and greatly effective constraints on true virtue and moral excellence, expressing in many cases that "virtue never benefits an individual in the long run." </p>

<p>     Part of why this issue has come to the forefront in my thought is partly due to talks of "middle class morality," and the works of Karl Marx in classes as of late. This middle class morality is quite real, and expresses the faux morality of the middle class, who although commonly seems to strive so hard to make progress and constantly improve, truly acts in order to put on a show for all, engaging in an endless competition with the neighboring middle class to appear so laxly representative of the upper class, and so very clearly unrepresentative of any semblance of lower class features. When in reality, many times the lower class is much happier and content with their lives than many middle class people, and the upper class is in many cases "above these quarrels." And Marx himself takes it a step further, not only discrediting what I have described as contemporary constraints, but also religion and government (which could fall as subsets under the constraints formerly mentioned), in the sense that  he believes much of the world to be enveloped in shallow thinking, trapping themselves in cycles of "development" that although seemingly momentous, lack true progress as well as lack humanly self. And to overcome these deficiencies, Marx believes that we need to dive head first into them, and struggle with them. Revolution is what Marx encourages, and specifically revolution with philosophy as its driving force, awarding a greater sense of agency to each and every individual, resulting in a "revolution that raises [a nation] to the official level of modern nations but to the human level that will be their immediate future" (Livingstone &amp; Benton, 251). And although there is a lot more to Marx than just this, I do see a connection here when applying this to modernity as serving as a philosophical issue. In a broader sense, what many would say could serve great purpose, is a revolution driven by philosophical thought that brings truly imperative matters to the forefront, and as horrendous and difficult as they may be, the immediate future following this development, whether it be on a grand scale, or simply one turning away from contemporary popular thought and education, and looking inward instead, will result in unprecedented progress on whatever scale it may be had. And although these contemporary constraints on virtuous and philosophical living are very real and present, they are just as easily able to be cast aside by those who choose to endeavor on the path of true self-development and examination. And even one person making a sliver of progress in this realm, can have momentous beneficial effects on not only the self, but others around them as well. </p>

<p class="has-text-align-center"> Work Cited</p>

<p>Marx, Karl. <em>Early Writings</em>. Translated by Rodney Livingstone and Gregor   </p>

<p>     Benton, Penguin, 1975.</p>
