---
layout: post
title: "Ethical Indecisiveness"
date: 2020-08-31 12:00:00 -0400
description: "On the particular irony of studying ethics and still struggling to decide what's right in the moment."
categories: The Stoic Cycle
permalink: /the-stoic-cycle/ethical-indecisiveness/
---
<p>     One of the most common issues I see occurring during the process of improving moral behavior and decision-making is that of indecisiveness. Now, let me first establish that I am in no way saying I don’t commonly face this issue, as I very much do. To emphasize this further, there is a common joke made about those who have taken on the position of mentors in ethics saying that they are the most indecisive people you’ll ever meet (<em>The Good Place</em>'s Chidi embodies this). It comes off as puzzling that those who should be in the best position(s) to avoid ever suffering from indecisiveness end up being some of its biggest victims. Examining this from a metaethical perspective we can begin to look into why this is the case, and whether or not it's necessarily warranted. </p>

<p>      Looking at the surface level of indecisiveness in this context, we can tie in the concept of indecisiveness itself with the concept of ethical theory. Ethics isn't black and white by any means. Deontology, Egoism, Divine Command Theory, Consequentialism, Virtue Ethics, and other theories are all constantly fighting for ethical superiority. Ethical theory is all about the process of attempting to understand morality, analyzing these varying approaches, justifying ethical ideas, and so on. This being said, it is almost as if the essence of ethics itself, is indecisiveness. Initially this seems to make people question why they should even care about ethics at all then, if all it does is fail to provide any solutions, and even those at the forefront of the field struggle to decide. But ethical theory, in and of itself, is extremely beneficial. Yes, we might not be yielding prodigious ethical advancements and solutions that are revolutionizing metaethics. But what we are doing, is constantly making progress and yielding results that are working through one of the most difficult issues of human existence, and that is <em>how to exist well</em>. Ethics is confusing, and ethics is difficult. And throughout ethical studies, the amount of questioning that arises not only toward the field, but also directed inward toward the self, can be quite overwhelming. But this indecisiveness is indicative of the presence of potential. If we were not struggling so much with ethical decision-making and selection, then it would imply that ethics is not something worth trying to figure out. </p>

<p>     So does this mean we're just supposed to accept this as a state, and think nothing else of it? Not at all. And this is where I feel Aristotelian virtue ethics really provides some valuable insight. They didn't focus on consequences, or universalizing imperatives, or egoistic approaches. They focused on <em>how to live</em> -- the exact issue aforementioned. They understood that most would never truly reach the state of a virtuous "sage," and chose instead to focus on cultivating a virtuous character. By way of doing this, indecisiveness slowly fades away as one's character is shaped and molded into that of a virtuous self. And each time indecisiveness is present throughout that progress, it usually results in a development, or a lasting benefit. Effectively, virtue ethics took in the issue of indecisiveness and used it as their own tool for ethical development. It is one of the primary issues of ethics that plague many other theories, yet aid this one. So next time we see Chidi experiencing ethical angst, or we are suffering through our own moral dilemma, I feel its best to approach such indecisiveness from a virtue ethical perspective. Address the indecisiveness, experience it, and grow from it. It isn't an ethical issue, but more so one of ethics greatest tools. </p>
